Hi everybody.
Physics major here today where I got a great problem for you.
We're going to look at the electric field from a continuous charged distribution.
So consider the wire I've got here on the whiteboard.
I want to look at three specific questions.
I want to find the electric field when I'm a distance x away from that wire and I've placed it kind
of right at the center of the wire.
Second part is I want to take that expression and I want to see what happens when I go really really
far from the wire.
What is the electric field look like when I'm really far from the wire and in the third case I want
to see what happens.
Now if I put my position right near the wire.
Right when I'm really close to the wire the wire looks really really long.
So we're going to look at our expression and take the right limits and see what the expression simplifies
to.
So let's get started.
I have a wire here that has a like L and it has a total charge q and its charge is uniformly distributed
over the length.
So let's see how to solve this problem.
Okay.
So let's start by looking at this system a little bit more closely.
We've got our wire here.
Got our distance x to the point p.
And now let's consider a small little bit of charge.
Somewhere on the wire and the magnitude of that charge is d q.
Now this little charge is going to produce an electric field at point p and it's going to be in this
direction.
And the magnitude of that field is going to be DC.
Now you notice since I've picked the position of the point x to be kind of in the center of that wire
every time there's a little charge D Q up on the top there's also going to be a little charge D Q On
the bottom.
And that one's also going to produce an electric field with the same magnitude.
But in this direction it's pointing away from that small charge.
If it's positive.
So one thing you notice if I find this to be the angle theta This is also going to be the angle theta.
What we're going to notice here is that you would re plot those vectors you'll see that those vectors
can be broken down into components and the y components of those vectors are going to cancel out they're
going to be equal and opposite.
So we can conclude right away just from the symmetry of the problem that the total field E Y is going
to be equal to zero by the symmetry of the problem
every time there's a little charge D Q On the positive y axis there's going to be another charge D Q
On the negative y axis.
So their contributions are always going to cancel out.
So that's kind of the first part.
The second part is the total field is going to be simply in the x direction.
Note Since the y components cancel and while there's gonna be two of them right there's a contribution
from the charge at the bottom and there's gonna be a contribution from the charge of the top.
So you can actually write the x component as being the magnitude times cos of theta and we'll we're
gonna do now is we're gonna add all the x contributions from every single charge here along the length
of the wire.
So in order to do that let's find what the magnitude of DC is and let's substitute with the value of
CO State it is and then we're going to add all the contributions of d e.
So we're left with a D E is going to be oh what's this magnitude of the vector.
Well this is simply the magnitude of the field produced by a charge D Q That's simple that's the expression
we know K the magnitude of the charge divided by the distance squared in the distance squared is simply
the distance from the charge D Q to the point where I'm evaluating that star vector r and I can write
that in terms of the distance x and plus the distance from
the origin to that charge let's call that y.
So here's my distance from the charge to the point.
The other thing I need to do now is find what is the angle Coast theta.
While the angle coast data is also defined here.
So you could see Coast theta simply x divided by by R..
So if you simplify things you'll have K D Q X divided by our cube.
All right great.
Next thing we have to do now is well let's get rid of D Q Because we're gonna have to add over all of
our small little charges okay.
And the way you do that is through the charge density remember our charge density for this wire was
simply the total charge divided by the total length
so that also means that I can write the charge density as D Q divided by the small length d y of this
small tiny segment okay.
So this is kind of something you always do when you're dealing with charge distributions as you have
to eliminate that small charge and write it in terms of the charge density.
So for this specific problem this is kind of what we want to do here.
All right.
We can substitute that in our expression for the electric field and we can replace AR with our variable
or the actual distance here from each small charge D Q to the point p and we're left with this expression
over here that D E and it's only the x component here that you're looking at is simply K X the charge
D Q I replace it with Lambda our charge density times the small element of length DIY and divided by
our cube while R is the root of x squared plus Y squared.
Therefore our cube this is gonna be to the three R's.
All right.
At the end you want to evaluate everything you want to find the total field and again it's only in the
x direction so what you have to do is you have to sum or integrate all the contributions of all the
D X values.
So that means we want to integrate the right hand side of our electric field expression here.
So that's K lambda x d y over X squared plus Y square to the three has and we're gonna integrate that
we're integrating over y.
We're integrating Y and Y goes if the total length of the wires L Y will go from minus L over to all
the way to l over to
not to simplify this a little bit further we can take out all the constants if you take out all the
constants you're simply going to get that the total expression for the electric field is the magnitude
of the x component is going to be KS A CONSTANT I could take it out of the integral land as a constant
and left with the integral from minus L over to the L over to of x d y divided by X squared plus Y squared
to the three halves.
All right.
So actually I could have factored out the X right.
The X is also a constant for this problem.
So let's do that right now.
Let me take the X out and let's just put it out here all right.
So let's go see how to evaluate this term
okay.
The next step I did was well we have to evaluate this integral and actually in its current form this
is actually not that easy.
So what I did was I simply went up and looked it up in an integral table kind of sheet a little bit
but that's OK.
I think once you get this result here you can do that to simply look it up in an integral table and
after you're able to write that the total electric field magnitude in the x direction or the x component
the field is simply going to be I'm going to evaluate this.
So everything in the square bracket is what I looked up in the integral table and I'm integrating over
y.
So I'm gonna get y up here.
I'm going to get X squared here and square root of x squared plus Y squared and evaluated between L
over 2 and minus.
All right.
So the next step is you simply substitute in our limits here and this simplifies nicely to a result
that looks like this.
We're gonna have l over 2 divided by X squared X squared plus L over 2 squared and minus again.
Now we're gonna have the same thing minus L over to X squared
okay.
So our final expression for the electric field or the magnitude of the electric field which is in the
x direction
is simply going to be both of those terms that are double up.
Okay.
They add up together and that means that this factor of two in the denominator here is going to leave.
So we're gonna be left with K lambda l There's still an x term over there and this whole term is still
there the square root of x squared plus L over 2 squared 1 simplification you can make you can get rid
of the charge density remember the charge density we can write as the total charge divided by the total
length.
The nice thing about making this substitution is it's going to get the final solution a nice form because
it's going to eliminate this length over here so let's do that.
So we're gonna be left with K.
The total charge that was on the wire divided by x divided by X squared plus L over 2 squared.
So here's the final expression we get for our electric field produced by the wire when I'm a distance
x away from the center of the wire.
All right.
So now let's manipulate this formula a little bit and see what happens when we're really far away from
the wire.
So we're gonna make X very very big and take the right limit.
And what happens when x is small compared to the overall length of the wire.
OK so now let's take the limit when we're gonna be really really far away from the wire.
So actually Ed that didn't probably exaggerate this diagram enough but we're going to take the limit
here when X is much much bigger than L.
So how do we simplify this expression when X is very big.
Well for that you simply have to expand the denominator and the way we're gonna do that is we're going
to leave that x term alone.
What I'm gonna do is I'm going to factor out one of the X terms from that square root rather than writing
a square root.
I'm simply going to write it as something raised to the 1 1/2.
So if I take out an X and I already had an X on the outside I'm gonna have X squared over here.
Now I'll be left with 1 plus L over 2 squared divided by also going to be divided by X squared because
I factored out x an x squared term.
Okay.
Now what do we do.
Well take a look at this term over here.
This term in the denominator if X is very very big compared to l this term in the denominator at least
the second part of it is going to be a very very small term.
So you're gonna have one plus something that is very very small.
And the way you expand that
so if I have one and one plus a variable let's call it alpha where alpha is very very small.
And in this case this is also raised to the one power.
This here is approximately equal to one minus one half Alpha.
Actually for this specific problem let's even just keep the one let's not even worry about this term.
Right.
If X is very big I divide by a very big number.
This term is negligible compared to the one in which you're left with is simply at the field the X is
simply k q divided by X squared.
Well that should look like a really familiar result.
This is exactly the fields you'd get if it was a point charged with a charge q right here at the origin
and you were a distance x away and you were really far away right.
Looks like a point charge
so even though you had a uniform charge distribution here once you're really really far away it basically
just looks like a point.
So I kind of expect that result.
Even before doing any of the calculation so let's have a look.
Now what happens when I'm really close to the wire.
So the distance x relative to the overall length is much much smaller.
So how do you simplify this expression that limit.
Well so in that limit what I can first do is I can first factor out turn from the bottom.
It's similar to the previous case.
So let's keep those terms the same except now instead of factoring out an X I don't want to do that
because X is gonna be small.
Okay.
Actually what I want to do this time is I want to factor out an L over to term.
If I factor out an L over to term well this term here is gonna be 1 plus.
I'm gonna be left with x l over 2 squared and everything to the 1 half might have to just think about
that for a little bit.
All right.
So now we're in the limit of x much much less than L.
So what can I do to this term.
Again if X is much much less than L this second term is very small compared to 1.
So if it's very small compared to 1 Let's just get rid of it.
So that's also the reason why you want to factor out an L over 2.
Now you want to end up getting an expression in this denominator where we have one plus something that
is very very small.
All right.
So at the end once you make this approximation you can write that field in the x direction simply going
to be there's an L over to term I'm going to bring that 2 to the top.
It's Kate Q
divided by X and there's still an L there and I can't forget the total charge q over l like this and
this whole term simply becomes a one the square root of 1 which is 1.
The last thing I can do now is we can simplify this a little bit and fir the long wire it's probably
best to write this in terms of yeah here's our factor of total charge divided by the total length.
That's simply the charge density so you can write this as two times the constant K are charged density
divided by X so the magnitude of the electric field produced by a wire when you're very close to it
is simply this expression over here.
Again if you remember what the constant K is K is simply 1 over for Pi Epsilon 0.
So if you substitute that in there you're going to end up getting over to PI Epsilon 0 times x.
Actually this is the exact same result you get using Gauss as law.
I have a video on that.
You can go have a look at it but if you want to find a field produced by an infinitely long wire or
a really long wire you can use goats is low due to the symmetry of the problem and you'll get the same
result here in the right hand box.